# C-InterSecture
**C-InterSecture** (**C**omputional tool for **InterS**pecies analysis of genome archit**ecture**)pipeline is python 2.7 based utilits to cross-species comparison of Hi-C map. C-InterSecture was designed to liftover contacts between species, compare 3-dimensional organization of defined genomic regions, such as TADs, and analyze statistically individual contact frequencies..
 
## Prerequisites:
- numpy >= 1.9.0
- scipy >= 1.1.0
- [genome module](https://mirnylab.bitbucket.io/hiclib/_modules/mirnylib/genome.html) from mirnylib package with dependencies (the minimal required module is included)
- [Juicer Tools](https://github.com/aidenlab/juicer) (to generate .hic-files)

## Installation
There is no need for installation.

## Using C-InterSecture
C-InterSecture pipeline involves three steps: data preprocessing, contacts liftovering and, finally, visualization. Scripts for each step are placed in separate folder. 

### Data preprocessing
The data preprocessing includes contacts filtration, statistical analysis and equalization. This step requires genome fasta-files, bin coordinates, raw and normalized contact matrices outputed by HiC-Pro. The corresponding scripts are located in "0_preprocessing" folder. The preproccessing requires two annotation files: the chromosome order file and gaps coverage. The chromosome order file contains a list of chromosomes with any additional information (for example, [chromosome sizes](https://github.com/NuriddinovMA/C-InterSecture/tree/master/0_preprocessing/EXAMPLE-UNMAP.ini)). The gaps coverage files are generated by the `unmappedBins.py` utility taking genome fasta-file.
```
python unmappedBins.py < unmap.ini
```
The file `unmap.ini` includes a space/tab delimited list of genome fasta files and bin sizes ([see example](https://github.com/NuriddinovMA/C-InterSecture/tree/master/0_preprocessing/EXAMPLE-UNMAP.ini)).
Output files are (and must been) placed with genome file and named as 'geneme_file_name.resolution.unmap' (if genome file named hg38.fa and bin size = 50 kb, the output must be named 'hg38.fa.50000.unmap'). The gap coverage files are stored in bed-liked format:
```
chrName \ bin_start \ bin_end \ N-bases_percent
```
After generation `.unmap`-files, one can run the preprocessing:
```
python pre.py < pre.ini
```
Ini-file contains all needed parameters ([see example](https://github.com/NuriddinovMA/C-InterSecture/tree/master/0_preprocessing/EXAMPLE-PRE.ini)). Preprocessing will output preprocessed contacts (`.initialContacts`-files), which are stored using a simple tab-delimited text format:
```
chr1 \ pos1 \ chr2 \ pos2 \ contacts \ min \ max \ coverages1 \ coverages2 \ distances
```
The *min* and *max* columns reflect a range of contact deviation. The *coverages1* and *coverages2* columns reflect a Hi-C read coverage of contacted bin. The *distance* columns store a genome distance between contacted bins. If *distances* = -1000, this contact is interchromosomal.

### Contact liftovering
This step requires a pair of `.initialContacts`-files from compared species and a pair of files containing synteny map. 
The synteny files (`.mark`) contain the mapping rules between the compared species as a simple tab-delimited text format:
```
chr_sp1 \ start1 \ end1 \ chr_sp2 \ start2 \ end2
```
The synteny map may be generated from `.net`-files [see UCSC pairwise alignments](http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/downloads.html) using 'net2mark.py' utilty: 
```
python net2mark.py < net.ini
```
or any others ways, for example, by formating a list of [conservative non-coding elements](http://ancora.genereg.net/downloads/). The file `net.ini` includes a space/tab delimited list of `net.`-files ([see example](https://github.com/NuriddinovMA/C-InterSecture/tree/master/1_liftovering/EXAMPLE-NET.ini)). The `net2mark.py` utility produces JuiceBox compatible 2D-annotation files (.2D.ann) with synteny blocks.

After generation `.mark`-files, can run the contact lifovering:
```
python lift.py < lift.ini
```
Ini-file contains all needed paramaters ([see example](https://github.com/NuriddinovMA/C-InterSecture/tree/master/1_liftovering/EXAMPLE-LIFT.ini)). The pipeline produces **two** `.allContacts`-files with liftovered contacts: species_1 to species_2 and species_2 to species_1. The lifovered contacts are stored using a simple tab-delimited text format:
```
chr1_reference \ pos1_reference \ chr2_reference \ pos2_reference \ remap1_query \ remap2_query \ reference_contacts \ query_contacts \ reference_deviations \ query_deviations	\ reference_coverages \ query_coverages	\ query_contact_distances
```
**WARNING!** To avoid rewriting files, create an independent folder for each pair of species in comparison.

### Postprocessing
This step produces user-friendly output.

`python allContacts2hic.py < post.ini` - generates .hic-files for JuiceBox for full genome comparing, this option requires Juicer Tools;

`python allContacts2plot.py < post.ini` - generates a heat-map representation of contacts within given region, reflecting differences between a chromatin architecture of comparing species and statistical significance of these differences;

`python allContacts2metric.py < post.ini` - calculate a quantitative estimation of differences between a chromatin architecture of comparing species and generate corresponded .bedGraph-files.

Ini-file contains all needed paramaters to visualize results ([see example](https://github.com/NuriddinovMA/C-InterSecture/tree/master/2_postprocessing/EXAMPLE-POST.ini)).
